---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/0-neurology/davidson/diseases-of-the-neuromuscular-junction/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"created":"2025-05-10T20:37:32.872+06:30","updated":"2025-06-13T00:10:22.771+06:30"}
---

# Myasthenia gravis
This is the most common cause of acutely evolving, fatigable weakness and preferentially affects ocular, facial and bulbar muscles.
## Pathophysiology
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease, most commonly (80% of cases) caused by antibodies to acetylcholine receptors in the post-junctional membrane of the neuromuscular junction. The resultant blockage of neuromuscular transmission and complement-mediated inammatory response reduces the number of acetylcholine receptors and damages the end plate (Fig. 28.50). Other antibodies can produce a similar clinical picture, most notably autoantibodies to muscle-specic kinase (MuSK), which is involved in the regulation and maintenance of acetylcholine receptors. About 15% of patients (mainly those with late onset) have a thymoma, most of the remainder displaying thymic follicular hyperplasia. Myasthenic patients are more likely to have associated organ- specic autoimmune diseases. Triggers are not always evident but some drugs (e.g. penicillamine) can precipitate an antibody-mediated myasthenic syndrome that may persist after drug withdrawal. Other drugs, especially aminoglycosides and quinolones, may exacerbate the neuromuscular blockade and should be avoided in patients with myasthenia.
### [[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 11.jpg|Fig. 28.50 Myasthenia gravis and Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS).]]
## Clinical features
Myasthenia gravis usually presents between the ages of 15 and 50 years and there is a female preponderance in younger patients. In older patients, males are more commonly affected. It tends to run a relapsing and remitting course. The most evident symptom is fatigable muscle weakness; movement is initially strong but rapidly weakens as muscle use continues. Worsening of symptoms towards the end of the day or following exercise is characteristic. There are no sensory signs or signs of involvement of the CNS, although weakness of the oculomotor muscles may mimic a central eye movement disorder. The rst symptoms are usually intermittent ptosis or diplopia but weakness of chewing, swallowing, speaking or limb movement also occurs. Resting of the eyelids (looking downwards) may be followed by increased reex elevation with up-gaze (so-called Cogan's lid twitch sign). Any limb muscle may be affected, most commonly those of the shoulder girdle; the patient is unable to undertake tasks above shoulder level, such as combing the hair, without frequent rests. Respiratory muscles may be involved and respiratory failure is an avoidable cause of death. Aspiration may occur if the cough is ineffectual. Ventilatory support is required where weakness is severe or of abrupt onset. Subtypes of myasthenia gravis include ocular myasthenia, where disease is often conned to eye muscles, and generalised myasthenia, where more widespread muscle involvement is seen which can include bulbar and respiratory muscles. There is often overlap between these subtypes. Congenital (genetic) forms of myasthenia also exist and do not have an autoimmune basis.
## Investigations 
Serological investigations play an important role in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies are highly specic, but seronegative cases also exist and further serological testing, e.g. for MuSK antibodies, should be performed if AChR antibodies are negative. Anti-MuSK antibodies are associated with prominent bulbar involvement. Neurophysiological assessment is important in establishing the diagnosis. Repetitive stimulation during nerve conduction studies may show a characteristic decremental response if the muscle has been clinically affected. Specialised single bre EMG changes such as ‘jitter’ may also be seen. All patients should have a thoracic CT or MRI to exclude thymoma, especially those without anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies. Screening for associated autoimmune disorders, particularly thyroid disease, is important. Intravenous injection of the short-acting anticholinesterase edrophonium bromide (the Tensilon test) is less widely used than before and requires specialist involvement in cases where there is diagnostic doubt. Structural imaging (e.g. MRI of brainstem) may be needed to exclude alternative diagnoses that can cause ocular-bulbar weakness.
## Management 
The goals of treatment are to maximise the activity of acetylcholine at remaining receptors in the neuromuscular junctions and to limit or abolish the immunological attack on motor end plates. The duration of action of acetylcholine is prolonged by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase. The most commonly used anticholinesterase drug is pyridostigmine. Muscarinic side-effects, including diarrhoea and colic, may be controlled by propantheline. Myasthenia gravis can cause life-threatening disease, often referred
to as ‘myasthenic crisis’, when bulbar and respiratory failure occurs. Prompt acute immunotherapy, often using intravenous immunoglobulin or plasma exchange is required, together with a longer-term immunosuppressive approach. Supportive respiratory care, and early involvement of intensive care teams, is important during these periods. Immunological treatment of myasthenia is outlined in Box 28.89. Thymoma should be managed with joint oncology and thoracic surgery input. Prognosis is variable and remissions may occur spontaneously. When myasthenia is entirely ocular, prognosis is excellent and disability slight. Younger seropositive patients with generalised disease may benet from thymectomy in the absence of thymoma, while older patients are less likely to have a remission despite treatment. Rapid progression of the disease more than 5 years after onset is uncommon.
Some medications, such as aminoglycoside antibiotics, can worsen myasthenia gravis.
### 28.89 Immunological treatment of myasthenia
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Acute treatments </mark>
**Intravenous immunoglobulin** 
	 Lowers production of antibodies and rapidly reduces weakness 
**Plasma exchange** 
	 Removing antibody from the blood may produce marked improvement; this is usually brief, so is normally reserved for myasthenic crisis or for pre-operative preparation
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Long-term treatments </mark>
**Glucocorticoid treatment** 
	 Improvement can be preceded by marked exacerbation of myasthenic symptoms, so treatment should be initiated cautiously in an environment where deterioration can be managed. In an outpatient setting many neurologists start corticosteroids at a low dose and increase gradually. If urgent high-dose steroids are needed this may require hospital admission
	 Usually necessary to continue for months or years, risking adverse effects
**Pharmacological immunosuppression treatment** 
	 Azathioprine 2.5 mg/kg daily reduces the necessary dosage of glucocorticoids and may allow withdrawal. Effect on clinical features may be delayed for months
	 Mycophenolate mofetil and rituximab are both used, although high-quality evidence is currently lacking
**Thymectomy**
	 Likely to be required for thymoma 
	 Should be considered in any antibody-positive patient under 45 years with symptoms not conned to extraocular muscles, unless the disease has been established for more than 7 years

# Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Other rarer conditions can present with muscle weakness due to impaired transmission across the neuromuscular junction. The most common of these is the Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS), which can occur as an inammatory or paraneoplastic phenomenon. Antibodies to pre-synaptic voltage-gated calcium channels (see Fig. 28.50) impair transmitter release. Patients may have autonomic dysfunction (e.g. dry mouth) in addition to muscle weakness but the cardinal clinical sign is absence of tendon reexes, which return after sustained contraction of the relevant muscle. The condition is associated with underlying malignancy in a high percentage of cases and investigation must be directed towards identifying any neoplasm. Diagnosis is made electrophysiologically on the presence of post-tetanic potentiation of motor response to nerve stimulation at a frequency of 20–50/sec. Treatment is with 3,4-diaminopyridine, or pyridostigmine and immunosuppression.