---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/0-neurology/davidson/neuro-inflammatory-diseases/","dgPassFrontmatter":true,"created":"2025-05-07T21:12:46.700+06:30","updated":"2025-06-13T00:09:38.746+06:30"}
---

# Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an important treatable cause of long-term disability in adults. The annual incidence is around 7 per 100 000, while the lifetime risk of developing MS is about 1 in 400. The incidence of MS is higher in Northern Europeans and the disease is about twice as common in females.

## Pathophysiology 
There is evidence that both genetic and environmental factors play a causative role. The prevalence of MS is low near the equator and increases in the temperate zones of both hemispheres. People retain the risk of developing the disease in the zone in which they grew up, indicating that environmental exposures during growth and development are important. Prevalence also correlates with environmental factors, such as sunlight exposure, vitamin D and exposure to Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), although causative mechanisms remain unclear. Genetic factors are also relevant; the risk of familial occurrence in MS is 15%, with highest risk in rst-degree relatives (age-adjusted risk 4%–5% for siblings and 2%–3% for parents or offspring). Large genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of MS implicate the modest inuence of hundreds of genes, in particular those with an immunological function, and there is overlap with other immune diseases. An autoimmune cause of multiple sclerosis is therefore supported by genetic studies, a prominent role of immune cells in disease pathogenesis and efcacy of multiple immune therapies. Initial CNS inammation in MS involves entry of lymphocytes across
the blood–brain barrier, which can be inhibited by monoclonal antibodies like natalizumab which bind α4ß1-integrin. These cells proliferate in perivascular lesions and the resulting inammatory cascade releases cytokines and initiates destruction of the oligodendrocyte–myelin unit. Histologically, the resultant lesion is a plaque of inammatory demyelination, most commonly in the periventricular regions of the brain, the optic nerves and the spinal cord (Fig. 28.25), and also found in the cortex. After the acute attack, gliosis and repair by oligodendrocyte precursor cells follows, leaving a shrunken scar. Much of the initial acute clinical decit is caused by the effect of inammation on transmission of the nervous impulse rather than structural disruption of myelin, and may explain the rapid recovery of some decits. In the long term, accumulating myelin loss reduces the efciency of impulse propagation or causes complete conduction block, contributing to sustained impairment of CNS functions. Inammatory mediators released during the acute attack, and loss of structural and trophic support from myelinating cells, contribute to axonal damage, which is a feature of the latter stages of the disease and is an important substrate of disability in the later, progressive phase of MS (Fig. 28.26).

[[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 17.webp|Fig. 28.25 Multiple sclerosis.]]

[[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 18.webp|Fig. 28.26 The progression of disability in fulminant, relapsing–remitting and progressive multiple sclerosis]]

## Clinical features 
The diagnosis of MS requires the demonstration of otherwise unexplained CNS lesions separated in time and space (Box 28.45); traditionally, this meant two or more clinical relapses affecting different parts of the nervous system, and the rst ever episode is often referred to as a ‘clinically isolated syndrome’ (CIS). However recent changes to diagnostic criteria mean that MS may be diagnosed after an isolated episode because MRI can identify clinically silent lesions of different ages, and the presence of unpaired oligoclonal bands in the CSF can strongly suggest the development of future events (Box 28.45). As such MS can be proactively diagnosed and treated compared to a decade ago. The peak age of onset of MS is the fourth decade; onset in childhood or after the age of 70 years is less common but can occur. Symptoms and signs of MS usually evolve over days or weeks, resolving over weeks or months. About 85%–90% of patients have an initial relapsing and remitting clinical course with variable intervening recovery, although the majority will eventually enter a secondary progressive phase. Most of the rest follow a slowly progressive clinical course (so-called primary progressive MS). Aggressive variants of multiple sclerosis can occur, and this can include presentation with tumour-like lesions which may require biopsy for conrmation (see Fig. 28.26). The clinical course of multiple sclerosis is highly variable and difcult to predict. Frequent relapses with incomplete recovery indicate a poorer prognosis and the need for high efcacy therapy. Some milder cases have an interval of years or even decades between attacks.
There are a number of typical clinical symptoms and syndromes suggestive of MS, occurring either at presentation or during the course of the illness (Box 28.46). The physical signs observed in MS are determined by the anatomical site of inammation. Combined spinal cord and brainstem signs are common, although evidence of previous optic neuritis may be found in the form of an afferent pupillary decit. Cognitive symptoms of MS are underappreciated and can be signicant, particularly in the later stages of the disease. The prognosis for patients with MS is difcult to predict with con-dence, especially early in the disease. Those with untreated relapsing and remitting MS experience, on average, 1–2 relapses every 2 years, although this may decline with time. Prognosis is better for patients with optic neuritis and only sensory relapses. Overall, about one-third of patients are disabled to the point of needing help with walking after 10 years, and this proportion rises to about half after 15 years. It would appear likely (though this is as yet unproven) that disease-modifying drugs will have an effect on long-term disability.

### 28.45 The McDonald criteria for the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) (2017)*
| Number of clinical attacks | Number of lesions with objective clinical evidence            | Additional evidence required to diagnose MS                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ≥2                         | ≥2                                                            | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| ≥2                         | 1 (with reasonable historical evidence of a previous relapse) | None                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| ≥2                         | 1                                                             | Dissemination in space demonstrated by an additional clinical attack implicating a different CNS site or by MRI                                                                                                                                      |
| 1                          | ≥2                                                            | Dissemination in time demonstrated by an additional clinical attack or by MRI or demonstration of CSF-specic oligoclonal bands                                                                                                                      |
| 1                          | 1                                                             | Dissemination in space demonstrated by an additional clinical attack implicating a different CNS site or by MRI and Dissemination in time demonstrated by an additional clinical attack or by MRI, or demonstration of CSF-specic oligoclonal bands |
### 28.46 Clinical features of multiple sclerosis 
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Common presentations of multiple sclerosis </mark>
	 Optic neuritis 
	 Transverse myelitis 
	 Brainstem syndrome 
	 Cerebellar syndrome
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Other symptoms and syndromes seen in MS</mark>
	 Afferent pupillary defect and optic atrophy (previous optic neuritis) 
	 Lhermitte’s symptom (tingling in spine or limbs on neck exion) 
	 Progressive paraparesis 
	 Partial Brown–Séquard syndrome (Fig. 28.18) 
	 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia with ataxia 
	 Tremor 
	 Cognitive dysfunction 
	 Trigeminal neuralgia under the age of 50

## Investigations 
There is no single diagnostic test that is denitive for MS and the results of investigation need to be combined with the clinical picture in order to make a diagnosis; MRI is the most important investigation (Fig. 28.27). MS mimics should be excluded (see below). Following the rst clinical event, investigations help conrm the disseminated nature of the disease. MRI is the most sensitive technique for imaging lesions in brain and spinal cord (Fig. 28.28) and for excluding other causes that have provoked the neurological decit. MS lesions often have an oval appearance and lesions which have developed in the past couple of months usually take up contrast around the lesion rim. Typical MRI lesion locations include the periventricular region, juxtacortical, infratentorial regions and spinal cord. Spinal cord lesions in MS are typically short and are asymmetric (Fig. 28.28). Longer spinal cord lesions, over 3 vertebral bodies in length, should raise the possibility of neuromyelitis optica, an antibody-mediated neuroinammatory disease. In older age groups, MRI appearances in MS may be confused with those of small-vessel disease and non-specic white matter lesions can be seen in common conditions such as migraine. Therefore careful and experienced evaluation of brain and spinal cord imaging is important for accurate diagnosis. In MS, the CSF typically has a normal white cell count and protein, although may show a small lymphocytic pleocytosis in active disease. CSF can be used to identify intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins in MS. Oligoclonal bands are found in the CSF but not the blood in about 90% of patients. The presence of these bands can help facilitate a more rapid diagnosis of MS in individuals who have had a single clinical event, since they suggest a more chronic neuroinammatory process. Oligoclonal bands are not specic for MS and denote only intrathecal inammation, provided they are unique for the CSF. These can appear in other disorders, which should be excluded by examination and investigation. It is important to exclude other potentially treatable conditions, such as infection, vitamin B12
deciency and spinal cord compression.

[[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 19.webp|Fig. 28.27 Investigations in a patient suspected of having multiple sclerosis.]]

[[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 20.webp|Fig. 28.28 Multiple sclerosis. Demyelinating lesion in cervical spinal cord]]

## Management 
The management of MS involves (i) disease modifying therapies and (ii) symptomatic approaches.

### Disease-modifying treatment (DMT) 
The past two decades have seen enormous progress in the treatment of multiple sclerosis, in particular the treatment of early MS. There is a broad spectrum of immunotherapies for the treatment of MS, with > 10 drugs approved in Europe and the United States. These drugs are most efcacious in the relapsing–remitting phase of disease, and early diagnosis and treatment is increasingly viewed as important in improving long-term outcomes. All DMTs reduce relapse frequency and higher efcacy drugs, for example B-cell depleting monoclonal antibodies, reduce the development of disability. Recently, immunotherapies have also been approved to prevent disability in progressive forms of MS, although only where active inammation can be demonstrated. In general, drugs with higher efcacy are associated with more serious side-effects and clinical trials are under way to determine the optimum level of immune treatment early in the course of MS (Box 28.47). Careful selection and counselling of patients are necessary and these drugs should be supervised by teams experienced in their use, as recommended in national guidelines. Some DMTs can be used during pregnancy, but MS specialist advice should be sought. Smoking, poor diet and obesity are risk factors for disease progression in MS, and should be addressed as early as possible.

#### 28.47 Disease-modifying treatments in multiple sclerosis
| Treatment            | Route of administration/ dosing                                                                              | Comment                                                                                                                                                              |
| -------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ==High-efcacy==     | ==biologic therapy:==                                                                                        | ==average relapse rate reduction > 50%==                                                                                                                             |
| Ocrelizumab          | Intravenous infusion every 6 months                                                                          | Associated with infusion reactions, increased infection risk and<br>hypogammaglobulinaemia. Rituximab is also widely used in some countries with strong RCT evidence |
| Natalizumab          | 4-weekly intravenous infusion                                                                                | Risk of PML in individuals who have evidence of JC virus infection                                                                                                   |
| Alemtuzumab          | Intravenous infusion over two courses separated by 12 months; 5-day infusion initially, second course 3 days | Cytokine release syndrome and infusion reactions. 30% develop secondary autoimmunity, mainly affecting thyroid                                                       |
| ==Moderate efcacy== | ==immunotherapy:==                                                                                           | ==average relapse rate reduction 30%–50%==                                                                                                                           |
| Fingolimod           | Daily oral                                                                                                   | More effective than interferon. First dose bradycardia, increased susceptibility to infections, macular oedema                                                       |
| Cladribine           | Pulsed oral treatment                                                                                        | Risk of lymphopenia and infections. Some concern about longer-term cancer risk                                                                                       |
| Dimethyl fumarate    | Daily oral                                                                                                   | May cause ushing and gastrointestinal disturbance. Small risk of PML                                                                                                |
| ==Lower efcacy==    | ==immunotherapy:==                                                                                           | ==average relapse rate reduction 30%==                                                                                                                               |
| Glatiramer acetate   | Alternate-day / subcutaneous injection                                                                       | Similar efcacy to interferon-beta                                                                                                                                   |
| Teriunomide         | Daily oral                                                                                                   | May cause diarrhoea, alopecia, hepatotoxicity and teratogenicity                                                                                                     |
| Interferon-beta      | Alternate-day or weekly intramuscular or subcutaneous injection                                              | In widespread use for reducing relapse rate                                                                                                                          |

### The acute relapse 
In a disabling relapse of MS, pulses of high-dose glucocorticoid, given either intravenously or orally over 3–5 days, will shorten the duration of the acute episode, but will not affect long-term recovery. If a patient develops a new neurological decit whilst on a DMT, consideration should also be given to possible neurological side-effects of the drug (e.g. visual loss due to ngolimod-associated macular oedema, cognitive symptoms caused by natalizumab-associated PML)

### Treatment of symptoms, complications and disability
Treatments for the complications of MS are summarised in Box 28.48. It is important to provide patients with a careful explanation of the nature of the disease and its outcome. Specialist nurses working in a multidisciplinary team of health-care professionals are of great value in managing the chronic phase of the disease. Periods of physiotherapy and occupational therapy may improve functional capacity in those who become disabled, and guidance can be provided on the provision of aids at home. Bladder care is particularly important. Urgency and frequency can be treated pharmacologically (see Box 28.23) but this may lead to a degree of retention with an attendant risk of infection. Urinary retention can be managed initially by intermittent urinary catheterisation but an in-dwelling catheter may become necessary. It is important to address sexual dysfunction, which can occur and is a frequent source of distress. Pregnancy does not increase the risk of progression of MS but relapses may occur post-partum (Box 28.49).

#### 28.48 Treatment of complications in multiple sclerosis
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Dysaesthesia and pain</mark>
	 Carbamazepine 
	 Gabapentin
	 Duloxetine 
	 Amitriptyline
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Walking speed </mark>
	 Fampridine
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Bladder symptoms </mark>
	 See Box 28.23
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Erectile dysfunction</mark> 
	 Sildenal 50–100 mg/day
	 Tadalal
<mark style="background: #FFB86CA6;">Spasticity</mark>
	 Physiotherapy 
	 Baclofen (usually oral) 
	 Dantrolene 
	 Gabapentin 
	 Cannabinoids
	 Tizanidine 
	 Intrathecal baclofen 
	 Local (intramuscular) injection of botulinum toxin
	 Chemical neuronectomy

#### 28.49 Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy
** Counselling:** provision of pre-conception counselling is best practice. 
** Relapse risk:** slight reduction in relapse rate during pregnancy, but increased risk of postpartum relapse
** Disease-modifying drugs:** some DMTs can be continued during pregnancy following assessment of risk–benet. Specialist advice is recommended in all cases.

# Transverse myelitis
Transverse myelitis is an acute, usually monophasic, demyelinating disorder affecting the spinal cord. It is sometimes thought to be post-infectious in origin. It occurs at any age and presents with a subacute paraparesis with a sensory level, accompanied by severe pain in the neck or back at the onset. MRI should distinguish this from an external lesion affecting the spinal cord. CSF examination shows cellular pleocytosis. Oligoclonal bands are usually absent. Treatment is with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone. The outcome is variable: one-third have static decit, one-third go on to develop MS and one-third recover with no subsequent relapse. Some clinical features may suggest a higher risk of MS after transverse myelitis.

# Neuromyelitis optica
Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD, previously Devic disease) typically presents with severe optic neuritis or longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis. NMO can also cause severe vomiting or hiccups due to brainstem dysfunction. With cord presentations, spinal MRI scans show lesions that are typically longer than three spinal segments. The majority of cases are associated with an antibody against an astrocytic water channel, aquaporin 4. It is likely that this is a pathogenic antibody. The presence of aquaporin 4 antibodies is a strong predictor of future relapse. More recently it is recognised that some cases of NMOSD can be associated with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-associated MOG antibodies, although these patients might be less prone to relapse. A proportion of NMOSD are not associated with known antibodies. Brain lesions can be seen on MRI, but are less prominent than in MS and can develop in aquaporin 4-rich areas around the base of the fourth ventricle. Clinical decits tend to recover less well than in MS, and the disease may be more aggressive with more frequent relapses. Treatment with glucocorticoids, oral immunosuppression and rituximab is often used. Recent clinical trials have suggested efcacy of B-cell depletion, IL-6 blockade and complement inhibition (Fig. 28.29).

[[0 Neurology/Davidson/Attachments/Davidson Neurology 21.webp|Fig. 28.29 Neuromyelitis optica.]]
# Autoimmune encephalitis
Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) is an immune-mediated brain disease which can occur at any age and presents with cognitive symptoms, behavioural change and seizures. AE can occasionally develop following a preceding infection and should be considered if there is an inammatory deterioration following recovery from an initial brain infection. AE can present with distinct clinical syndromes and these are associated with specic autoantibodies directed against neuronal cell surface antigens. Limbic encephalitis presents with memory disturbance (and can mimic neurodegenerative dementia in older persons), emotional and behavioural disturbance and seizures, which can cause brief dystonic movements of the face and arm (facio-brachial dystonic seizures). MRI may show enhancement and inammation in hippocampus and associated limbic structures, and there are often mild inammatory changes in the CSF. There is a strong association with Lgi1 and CASPR2 antibodies. AE can also be associated with NMDAR antibodies, and this syndrome typically presents with neuropsychiatric symptoms, movement disorders, autonomic dysfunction and seizures and often causes serious illness requiring intensive care admission. A subset of NMDAR encephalitis is associated with ovarian teratoma. Corticosteroids, immune globulin and plasma exchange are often used acutely. AE can relapse or follow a chronic course and long-term immunosuppression with oral immunosuppressants, cyclophosphamide or rituximab may be needed.